Fina
====

The Netfilter script for the admin that knows what he's doing.

This file describes how Fina works and why it does it the way it does.
If you need a quick start in setting up Fina, look at the file INSTALL
that came with the package.

Introduction
------------

Fina is the result of working with various attempts at wrapping iptables
(rather: Netfilter) with scripts and other infrastructure in order to
make daily administration of rules easier. 

Due to my job, I've always needed a script that can easily be automated
remotely. No matter how great a script is, if it takes ages to update
fourteen web servers of a cluster, it's useless to me.

Another basic need for such a script is that it has to be secure by
default - without getting into the admins way too much. That is to say,
it only creates rules that the admin expressly configures. Of course, a
sensible set of configuration /examples/ is provided.

The third hard requirement is that the script should be capable of doing
everything Netfilter can. That means that no matter how complicated your
NAT and prerouting magic needs are, the script must be able to handle
it. One side effect of this is, that it must handle huge filter sets at
least as easily as Netfilter itself.

Finally, the script should be lightweight, having as few external
dependencies as possible. Also, the script itself should be as simple
and small as possible. This is because simple things have fewer ways in
which they can fail.

Design
------

Due to the four hard requirements mentioned above, the script doesn't
actually "know" all that much about Netfilter. This way, it easily
incorporates everything Netfilter can do - without having a moving
target of specs to adhere to.

Basically, Fina assembles an iptables-restore compatible rule dump from
snippets configure/edited by the admin of the machine. It then tries to
load the whole set. If this fails in any way, the old rule set is
restored.

Naturally, this means that Fina does next to nothing for the admin
when it comes to /generating/ rules on the machine. This is a conscious
decision. For one, whoever uses/configures a packet filter should be
aware of all the consequences of his actions. This includes for example
knowing why it is bad to drop all ICMP traffic.

Another reason is that providing examples or even recipes for packet
filters is something /documentation/ should do. It's not a good idea to
have a black box do "simply the right thing". Usually, there is a
non-trivial amount of users for which The Right Thing can't be easily
guessed.

How it works
------------

Fina expects one configuration file, /etc/fina/fina.cfg. This is
actually simply a shell script that is sourced from the main Fina
script. It contains (by default) variables that specify at least two
additional locations. First, a file that contains a list of kernel
modules that should be loaded before the rule set is loaded. This is
mainly for the boot phase. Actually, the necessary Netfilter rules
should be configured in the distribution's startup script, but this file
is for those distributions where no such file exists or it is unusable
for other reasons.

The second location is more important. It specifies the directory which
contains the rule snippets that Fina should assemble. Usually, this is
located at /etc/fina/rules.d/. Fina then proceeds to load all files from
said directory (and its sub-directories) that end in .rules. In order to
have reliable order when assembling, the files are usually prefixed with
two- or three-digit numbers. 

The expected format of the files is of no concern to Fina. Fina itself
will only assemble them in order into one file. After this, it will make
a backup of the current rule set (using iptables-save) and put it in a
location specified in /etc/fina/fina.cfg. Then, Fina will try to load
the generated file using iptables-restore. If this fails for whatever
reason, it will try to load the old rule set and exhibit an appropriate
error message plus whatever message it got from the failing
iptables-restore command. Fina can also be configured to keep a history
of old rule sets.

Dependencies
------------

As mentioned above, Fina is designed to be lightweigth both in its own
design as in its dependencies. As such, it was written as a bash script.
The choice of bash (vs. Bourne or Korn Shell) is its ubiquity on Linux
systems (and Netfilter is pretty much exclusive to Linux systems). On
top of bash (version 2 or higher), Fina uses GNU find to traverse its
configuration directory. Other versions of find will usually work, but
if they don't the find call(s) in Finas source can probably be adjusted
accordingly. If Fina is used to load Netfilter modules, it will of
course the modutils/module-init-tools for the kernel it's used with.
Finally (and obviously), Fina needs iptables-save and iptables-restore.

Other functionality
-------------------

In addition to generating and then directly loading a rule set, Fina can
also simply dump the file it would load to stdout ("pretend mode"). This
is useful if you suspect a bug in your Netfilter snippets and want to
take a look at the set before trying to load it. Fina adds a plethora of
comments to the generated file to make debugging easier. Using Finas
pretend mode, you can also ensure that Fina can read all the files it
should.

Also, this way you can create diffs between your currently running rules
and the rules Fina would generate. This way, you can easily spot if the
changes in the rules snippets have the expected results.

Keep in mind though that in this mode, Fina has no way of telling if
what it generates can actually be loaded with iptables-restore.
Unfortunately, the kernel interface does not provide a means to see if a
rule set could be loaded without actually activating it (if I'm wrong
here, I'd be glad to hear about such functionality).

In order to aid in debugging, all lines generated by Fina itself are
prefixed with "#Fina#", so you can tell which lines are from Fina and
which ones come from your files.

Feedback
--------

If you have comments, remarks, bug reports, wishes, feature suggestions
etc, don't hesitate to contact me:

	klausman-fina at schwarzvogel.de

The latest version of Fina can always be found here:

	http://www.schwarzvogel.de/

License
-------

Fina is released under the GPLv2. That is to say version 2, and only
that, not any later or earlier version. The package you downloaded
should contain a file called COPYING that contains the license.






